Let's look at a simple case of
Iterative deepening on a tree
with a branching factor of 2.
A level of 0, only one node is searched.
At level 1,
we touch this first node again and
then look at the two child nodes.
We've had to explore three nodes for
level 1 plus one node from level 0.
So, our total for
iterative deepening nodes, is 4.
At level 2, we add four nodes
to the bottom of the tree.
To add these nodes, we are looking
at the 3 above it as well for
a total of seven for this level.
Adding level 2 to our running tally
is 11 nodes for iterative deepening.
At level 3, we had eight more nodes,
so we examine 15 nodes for
this level in total.
Our iterative deepening total is now 26.
Know that at each level,
the sum total of nodes visited and
revisited by iterative deepening
is actually under two times the number
of nodes expanded by that level.
A depth-limited search to level
4 would examine 31 nodes, but
the iterative deepening total was 57.
Depth limited to level 5 would be 63,
and iterative deepening would be 120.
While researching the tree may
seem like a waste in practice,
it is a small multiplier compared to the
exponential increase from searching each
level deeper.
With a branching factor of 2,
iterative deepening expands less than
two times the number of nodes a depth
limited search would have
done at the same level.
When the branching factor is
greater than 2, as in most games,
then the redundancy caused by
iterative deepening is even less.
Perhaps a quick quiz would help.